RUMM-811 Add `rum_collection.md` guide (#279)
DataDog/dd-sdk-ios: docs/rum_collection.md

# iOS RUM Collection

<div class="alert alert-info">The iOS RUM collection is in beta. If you have any questions, contact our <a href="https://docs.datadoghq.com/help/" target="_blank">support team</a>.</div>

Send [Real User Monitoring data][rum] to Datadog from your iOS applications with [Datadog's `dd-sdk-ios` client-side RUM library][dd-sdk-ios] and leverage the following features:

* get a global idea about your app’s performance and demographics;
* understand which resources are the slowest;
* analyze errors by OS and device type.

## Setup

> 1. Declare the library as a dependency depending on your package manager (check our [Releases page][releases] for the recent beta version):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Declare the library as a dependency depending on your package manager (check our [Releases page][releases] for the latest beta version):
```

    {{< tabs >}}
    {{% tab "US" %}}

```swift
Datadog.initialize(
    appContext: .init(),
    configuration: Datadog.Configuration
        .builderUsing(
            rumApplicationID: "<rum_application-id>",
            clientToken: "<client_token>",
            environment: "<environment_name>"
        )
        .set(serviceName: "app-name")
        .build()
)
```

    {{% /tab %}}
    {{% tab "EU" %}}

```swift
Datadog.initialize(
    appContext: .init(),
    configuration: Datadog.Configuration
        .builderUsing(
            rumApplicationID: "<rum_application-id>",
            clientToken: "<client_token>",
            environment: "<environment_name>"
        )
        .set(serviceName: "app-name")
        .set(rumEndpoint: .eu)
        .build()
)
```

    {{% /tab %}}
    {{< /tabs >}}

3. Configure and register the RUM Monitor. You only need to do it once, usually in your `AppDelegate` code:

    ```swift
    import Datadog

    Global.rum = RUMMonitor.initialize()
    ```

> From here, you have two choices. You can either use our auto instrumentation to let the SDK track RUM Views, Resources, Actions and Errors automatically or you can instrument your app manually to send this data. It is also possible to mix both methods.

Reviewer: Just a matter of preference but I'd rather have:

The RUM SDK offers two instrumentation methods:
1. Auto-instrumentation (recommended) - the SDK tracks views, resources, actions and errors automatically
2. Manual instrumentation - you instrument your code to send RUM events

**Note**: It is possible to mix both methods.

what do you think?

Author: Yes, it's a better narration, done 👌

```swift
let session = URLSession(
    configuration: .default,
    delegate: DDURLSessionDelegate(),
    delegateQueue: nil
)
```

This will make the SDK track requests sent from this instance of the `URLSession`. Requests which URLs match the `firstPartyHosts` will be additionally marked as "first party" in RUM Explorer.

### RUM Actions

To enable RUM Actions tracking, use the `.trackUIKitActions(_:)` option when configuring the SDK:
```
Datadog.Configuration
   .builderUsing(...)
   .trackUIKitActions(true)
   .build()
```

This will make the SDK track all significant taps occuring in the app. For privacy reason, all interactions with the on on-screen keyboard are ignored.

### RUM Errors

By default, when RUM feature is enabled, all "error" and "critical" logs will be reported as the RUM Errors occuring on the current RUM View:
```swift
logger.error("message")
logger.critical("message")
```

Similarly, all finished APM spans marked as error will be reported as the RUM Error occuring on the current RUM View:
```swift
span.setTag(key: OTTags.error, value: true)
```

## Manual Instrumentation

### RUM Views

> To manually start and stop the RUM View use the `.startView(viewController:)` and `.stopView(viewController:)` methods available on `Global.rum`.

Author: ✅

# iOS RUM Collection

> <div class="alert alert-info">The iOS RUM collection is in beta. If you have any questions, contact our <a href="https://docs.datadoghq.com/help/" target="_blank">support team</a>.</div>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
<div class="alert alert-info">The iOS RUM collection is in beta. If you have any questions, contact the <a href="https://docs.datadoghq.com/help/" target="_blank">support team</a>.</div>
```

Send [Real User Monitoring data][rum] to Datadog from your iOS applications with [Datadog's `dd-sdk-ios` client-side RUM SDK][dd-sdk-ios] and leverage the following features:

> * get a global idea about your app’s performance and demographics;

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Get a holistic view of your app’s performance and demographics.
```

> * understand which resources are the slowest;

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Understand which resources are the slowest.
```

> * analyze errors by OS and device type.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Analyze errors by OS and device type.
```

## Setup

> 1. Declare the library as a dependency depending on your package manager (check our [Releases page][releases] for the latest beta version):

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Declare the library as a dependency, depending on your package manager. See Datadog's [Releases page][releases] for the latest beta version.
```

    {{< tabs >}}
    {{% tab "CocoaPods" %}}

You can use [CocoaPods][cocoapods] to install `dd-sdk-ios`:
```
pod 'DatadogSDK', :git => 'https://github.com/DataDog/dd-sdk-ios.git', :tag => '1.4.0-beta1'
```

[cocoapods]: https://cocoapods.org/

    {{% /tab %}}
    {{% tab "Swift Package Manager (SPM)" %}}

> To integrate using Apple's [Swift Package Manager][spm], add the following as a dependency to your `Package.swift`:

Reviewer 2: to integrate what?

Author: ```suggestion
To integrate the SDK using Apple's [Swift Package Manager][spm], add the following as a dependency to your `Package.swift`:
```

```swift
.package(url: "https://github.com/DataDog/dd-sdk-ios.git", .exact("1.4.0-beta1"))
```

[5]: https://swift.org/package-manager/

    {{% /tab %}}
    {{% tab "Carthage" %}}

You can use [Carthage][6] to install `dd-sdk-ios`:
```
github "DataDog/dd-sdk-ios" "1.4.0-beta1"
```

[6]: https://github.com/Carthage/Carthage

    {{% /tab %}}
    {{< /tabs >}}

> 2. Initialize the library with your application context and your [Datadog client token][7]. For security reasons, you must use a client token: you cannot use [Datadog API keys][9] to configure the `dd-sdk-ios` library as they would be exposed client-side in the iOS application IPA byte code. For more information about setting up a client token, see the [client token documentation][7]. You also need to provide an Application ID (see the [RUM Getting Started page][8]).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Initialize the library with your application context and your [Datadog client token][7]. For security reasons, you must use a client token: you cannot use [Datadog API keys][9] to configure the `dd-sdk-ios` library as they would be exposed client-side in the iOS application IPA byte code. For more information about setting up a client token, see the [client token documentation][7]. You also need to provide an Application ID (create a Javascript RUM application as explained in the [RUM Getting Started page][8]).
```

> 2. Initialize the library with your application context and your [Datadog client token][client-token]. For security reasons, you must use a client token: you cannot use [Datadog API keys][api-keys] to configure the `dd-sdk-ios` library as they would be exposed client-side in the iOS application IPA byte code. For more information about setting up a client token, see the [client token documentation][client-token]. You also need to provide an Application ID (see our [RUM Getting Started page][rum-getting-started]).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. Initialize the library with your application context and your [Datadog client token][client-token]. For security reasons, you must use a client token: you cannot use [Datadog API keys][api-keys] to configure the `dd-sdk-ios` library as they would be exposed client-side in the iOS application IPA byte code. For more information about setting up a client token, see the [client token documentation][client-token]. You also need to provide an Application ID (see the [RUM Getting Started page][rum-getting-started]).
```

    {{< tabs >}}
    {{% tab "US" %}}

```swift
Datadog.initialize(
    appContext: .init(),
    configuration: Datadog.Configuration
        .builderUsing(
            rumApplicationID: "<rum_application-id>",
            clientToken: "<client_token>",
            environment: "<environment_name>"
        )
        .set(serviceName: "app-name")
        .build()
)
```

    {{% /tab %}}
    {{% tab "EU" %}}

```swift
Datadog.initialize(
    appContext: .init(),
    configuration: Datadog.Configuration
        .builderUsing(
            rumApplicationID: "<rum_application-id>",
            clientToken: "<client_token>",
            environment: "<environment_name>"
        )
        .set(serviceName: "app-name")
        .set(rumEndpoint: .eu)
        .build()
)
```

    {{% /tab %}}
    {{< /tabs >}}

3. Configure and register the RUM Monitor. You only need to do it once, usually in your `AppDelegate` code:

    ```swift
    import Datadog

    Global.rum = RUMMonitor.initialize()
    ```

The RUM SDK offers two instrumentation methods:

> - Auto-instrumentation (recommended) - the SDK tracks views, resources, actions and errors automatically.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Auto-instrumentation (recommended) - the SDK tracks views, resources, actions, and errors automatically.
```

- Manual instrumentation - you instrument your code to send RUM events.

**Note**: It is possible to mix both methods.

> ## Auto Instrumentation

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Auto-instrumentation
```

### RUM Views

To enable RUM views tracking, use the `.trackUIKitRUMViews(using:)` option when configuring the SDK:
```swift
Datadog.Configuration
   .builderUsing(...)
   .trackUIKitRUMViews(using: predicate)
   .build()
```

> The `predicate` must be a class or struct conforming to our `UIKitRUMViewsPredicate` protocol:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `predicate` must be a class or struct conforming to the `UIKitRUMViewsPredicate` protocol:
```

```swift
public protocol UIKitRUMViewsPredicate {
    func rumView(for viewController: UIViewController) -> RUMViewFromPredicate?
}
```

> Inside the `rumView(for:)` implementation, your app should decide if a given `UIViewController` instance should start the RUM view or not (return `nil` in such case). The returned value of `RUMViewFromPredicate` should specify at least the `path` for created RUM view. Refer to code documentation comments for more details.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Inside the `rumView(for:)` implementation, your app should decide if a given `UIViewController` instance should start the RUM view or not (and return `nil` in this case). The returned value of `RUMViewFromPredicate` should specify at least the `path` for created the RUM view. Refer to code documentation comments for more details.
```

can we link to these comments?

> **Note**: the SDK will call `rumView(for:)` many times while your app is running. Your implementation of the predicate should not depend on the order of SDK calls.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Note**: The SDK calls `rumView(for:)` many times while your app is running. Your implementation of the predicate should not depend on the order of SDK calls.
```

### RUM Resources

To enable RUM resources tracking, use the `.track(firstPartyHosts:)` option when configuring the SDK:
```swift
Datadog.Configuration
   .builderUsing(...)
   .track(firstPartyHosts: ["your.domain.com"])
   .build()
```

> Also, assign our `DDURLSessionDelegate()` as a `delegate` of the `URLSession` you want to monitor, e.g.:

Reviewer 3: maybe we can state that if one of them isn't there, it won't work?

Author: IMO we should keep it short. This guide shows how to configure things to make it work, and we should not focus on explaining missconfiguration.

> Also, assign our `DDURLSessionDelegate()` as a `delegate` of the `URLSession` you want to monitor, e.g.:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Also, assign `DDURLSessionDelegate()` as a `delegate` of the `URLSession` you want to monitor, for example:
```

```swift
let session = URLSession(
    configuration: .default,
    delegate: DDURLSessionDelegate(),
    delegateQueue: nil
)
```

> This will make the SDK track requests sent from this instance of the `URLSession`. Requests which URLs match the `firstPartyHosts` will be additionally marked as "first party" in the RUM Explorer.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This makes the SDK track requests sent from this instance of the `URLSession`. Requests whose URLs match the `firstPartyHosts` are additionally marked as "first party" in the RUM Explorer.
```

### RUM Actions

To enable RUM actions tracking, use the `.trackUIKitActions(_:)` option when configuring the SDK:
```
Datadog.Configuration
   .builderUsing(...)
   .trackUIKitActions(true)
   .build()
```

> This will make the SDK track all significant taps occurring in the app. For privacy reasons, all interactions with the on-screen keyboard are ignored.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This makes the SDK track all significant taps occurring in the app. For privacy reasons, all interactions with the on-screen keyboard are ignored.
```

### RUM Errors

> All "error" and "critical" logs will be reported as RUM errors and linked to the current RUM view:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
All "error" and "critical" logs are be reported as RUM errors and linked to the current RUM view:
```

```swift
logger.error("message")
logger.critical("message")
```

> Similarly, all ended APM spans marked as error will be reported as RUM errors:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Similarly, all ended APM spans marked as error are be reported as RUM errors:
```

```swift
span.setTag(key: OTTags.error, value: true)
```

## Manual Instrumentation

### RUM Views

Use the following methods on `Global.rum` to manually collect RUM resources:
- `.startView(viewController:)`
- `.stopView(viewController:)`

Example:
```swift
// in your `UIViewController`:

override func viewDidAppear(_ animated: Bool) {
  super.viewDidAppear(animated)
  Global.rum.startView(viewController: self)
}

override func viewDidDisappear(_ animated: Bool) {
  super.viewDidDisappear(animated)
  Global.rum.stopView(viewController: self)
}
```

> For more details and available options, please refer to the code documentation comments.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For more details and available options, refer to the code documentation comments.
```
link to comments

### RUM Resources

Use the following methods on `Global.rum` to manually collect RUM resources:
* `.startResourceLoading(resourceName:url:httpMethod:)`
* `.stopResourceLoading(resourceName:kind:)`
* `.stopResourceLoadingWithError(resourceName:error:source:)`
* `.stopResourceLoadingWithError(resourceName:errorMessage:source:)`

Example:
```swift
// in your network client:

Global.rum.startResourceLoading(
    resourceName: "resource-name",
    url: requestURL,
    httpMethod: .GET
)

Global.rum.stopResourceLoading(
    resourceName: "resource-name",
    kind: .image,
    httpStatusCode: 200
)
```

> **Note**: the `String` used for `resourceName` in both calls must be unique for the resource you are calling, so the SDK can match resource start with its completion. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Note**: The `String` used for `resourceName` in both calls must be unique for the resource you are calling. This is necessary for the SDK to match a resource's start with its completion. 
```

> For more details and available options, please refer to the code documentation comments.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For more details and available options, refer to the code documentation comments.
```

link to comments

### RUM Actions

To manually register RUM action, use either:
* `.registerUserAction(type:name:)`

or:
* `.startUserAction(type:name:)`
* and `.stopUserAction(type:)`

> on `Global.rum`. The first method can be used for sending actions which have no time (e.g. `.tap`), while the other two should be used for actions which define start and stop time (e.g. `.scroll`).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
on `Global.rum`. The first method can be used for sending actions that have no time (e.g. `.tap`), while the other two are intended for actions that define start and stop time (e.g. `.scroll`).
```

Author: This one was changed on request, while editing, sorry 🙂.

> To manually register RUM action, use either:
> * `.registerUserAction(type:name:)`
> 
> or:
> * `.startUserAction(type:name:)`
> * and `.stopUserAction(type:)`
> 
> on `Global.rum`. The first method can be used for sending actions which have no time (e.g. `.tap`), while the other two should be used for actions which define start and stop time (e.g. `.scroll`).

Author: 👍 but there's a typo. This is correct:

```suggestion
To manually register instantaneous RUM actions (e.g: `.tap`), use:
* `.registerUserAction(type:name:)`

or for continuous RUM actions (e.g: `.scroll`), use:
* `.startUserAction(type:name:)`
* and `.stopUserAction(type:)`

on `Global.rum`.
```

Example:
```swift
// in your `UIViewController`:

@IBAction func didTapDownloadResourceButton(_ sender: Any) {
    Global.rum.registerUserAction(
        type: .tap,
        name: (sender as? UIButton).currentTitle ?? "",
    )
}
```

> **Note**: when using `.startUserAction(type:name:)` and `.stopUserAction(type:)`, the action `type` must be the same, so the SDK can match the action start with completion.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Note**: when using `.startUserAction(type:name:)` and `.stopUserAction(type:)`. This is necessary for the SDK to match a resource's start with its completion. 
```

> For more details and available options, please refer to the code documentation comments.

Reviewer 2: ^ see above

Author: ```suggestion
For more details and available options, refer to the code documentation comments.
```

### RUM Errors

Use the following methods on `Global.rum` to manually collect RUM errors:
- `.addViewError(message:source:)`
- `.addViewError(error:source:)`

Example:
```swift
// anywhere in your code:

rumMonitor.addViewError(message: "error message.", source: .source)
```

> For more details and available options, please refer to the code documentation comments.

Reviewer 2: see above

Author: ```suggestion
For more details and available options, refer to the code documentation comments.
```

[1]: https://docs.datadoghq.com/real_user_monitoring/data_collected/
[2]: https://github.com/DataDog/dd-sdk-ios
[3]: https://github.com/DataDog/dd-sdk-ios/releases
[7]: https://docs.datadoghq.com/account_management/api-app-keys/#client-tokens

> [8]: https://docs.datadoghq.com/real_user_monitoring/installation/?tab=us

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[8]: https://docs.datadoghq.com/real_user_monitoring/browser/#setup
```
